
*******************************************************
Observations - Query for Raw Data (Instrument-Specific)
*******************************************************

.. note:: 
    The `astroquery.eso` module provides several ways to search for raw data in the ESO Science Archive. This section focuses on the **instrument-specific query interface** for raw data :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.query_instrument`, while in :doc:`the generic raw-data query section <eso_obs_raw_general>` we describe **generic queries** using :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.query_main`.

In many cases, you will want to query the ESO Archive **for data from a specific instrument**. This is exactly what the :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.query_instrument` method is designed for. It allows you to search instrument-specific tables, which expose metadata fields and filters unique to each instrument. Internally, this method queries the corresponding instrument table (e.g., ``ist.muse``) via ESO's `TAP service <https://archive.eso.org/programmatic/#TAP>`_. This approach is ideal when you need precise control over your query, such as filtering by instrument configuration, mode, or observational setup.

Available Instruments
=====================

To begin retrieving raw data from the ESO Science Archive, you first need to identify the relevant instrument(s) for your search. Each instrument has its own dedicated query table accessible through the archive’s programmatic `TAP <https://archive.eso.org/programmatic/#TAP>`_ interface.

The list of all supported instruments can be retrieved using the :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.list_instruments` method:

.. doctest-remote-data::

    >>> from astroquery.eso import Eso
    >>> eso = Eso()
    
    >>> eso.list_instruments() # doctest: +IGNORE_OUTPUT
    ['alpaca', 'amber', 'apex', 'crires', 'efosc', 'eris',
    'espresso', 'fiat', 'fors1', 'fors2', 'giraffe', 'gravity',
    'harps', 'hawki', 'isaac', 'kmos', 'matisse', 'midi',
    'muse', 'naco', 'nirps', 'omegacam', 'pionier', 'sinfoni',
    'sofi', 'sphere', 'uves', 'vimos', 'vircam', 'visir',
    'wlgsu', 'xshooter']

This list corresponds to the instruments currently available for programmatic raw data queries in the ESO archive.

The list is dynamically generated by querying the archive’s internal TAP service. It can also be reproduced directly by executing the following ADQL query on the `ESO TAP interface <https://archive.eso.org/programmatic/#TAP>`_ or using the :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.query_tap` function:

.. code-block:: sql

      SELECT table_name 
      FROM TAP_SCHEMA.tables 
      WHERE schema_name = 'ist' 
      ORDER BY table_name

Once you have identified the instrument of interest, you can proceed with constructing your query and retrieving raw data products.

Available Query Constraints
===========================

Once an instrument is selected — for example, ``midi`` — you can inspect the available queryable columns using the ``help=True`` keyword in the :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.query_instrument` method. This is a useful first step to understand what metadata is available and how to structure your query.

The output includes column names, data types, units, and, where applicable,
``xtype`` information to indicate more specific column content. The ``xtype``
attribute defines how a string-valued column should be interpreted during
querying. For example, a column with datatype ``char`` may represent a standard
string (``xtype = null``), a timestamp (``xtype = timestamp``), or a sky region
footprint usable in ADQL spatial queries (``xtype = adql:REGION``), with this
interpretation reflected in the ``xtype`` field.

.. doctest-remote-data::

    >>> eso.query_instrument("midi", help=True) # doctest: +IGNORE_OUTPUT
    INFO:
    Columns present in the table ist.midi:
        column_name     datatype    xtype         unit
    ------------------- -------- ------------ -----------
         access_estsize     long                 kbyte
             access_url     char
           datalink_url     char
               date_obs     char
                    ...
              exp_start     char      timestamp
                    ...
                 object     char
                    ...      
           release_date     char      timestamp
               s_region     char   adql:REGION
                    ...      
                    utc    float                    s
    Number of records present in the table ist.midi:
    437577
    [astroquery.eso.core]

Query with Constraints
======================

Once the available query columns have been inspected, you can construct a constrained query to retrieve relevant datasets. For example, suppose you want to retrieve MIDI observations that were taken between ``2008-01-01`` and ``2009-05-12``.

The ``column_filters`` dictionary allows you to specify conditions for individual columns, using ADQL-compatible expressions under the hood. In this case, the filters apply to:

- ``object``: the target name, matched as a string (case-insensitive)
- ``exp_start``: the observation start time, stored as a ``char`` column with ``timestamp`` ``xtype``

The ``columns`` argument controls which fields are returned in the results table.

.. tip::
   
    - Use only column names returned via ``help=True`` (in this case ``exp_start``, ``object``, ``prog_id``, ``exptime``, etc.).
    - String filters (like ``object``) are matched case-insensitively.
    - Temporal filters on fields like ``exp_start`` or ``release_date`` can use SQL-style syntax (e.g. ``between 'YYYY-MM-DD' and 'YYYY-MM-DD'``).
    - Column names are case-sensitive in Python, so ensure they match exactly.

.. doctest-remote-data::
    >>> table = eso.query_instrument(
    ...             instrument="midi",
    ...             column_filters={
    ...                 "exp_start": "between '2008-01-01' and '2009-05-12'"},
    ...             columns=["object", "date_obs"]
    ...                             )
    >>> table # doctest: +IGNORE_OUTPUT
    <Table length=1000>
                object                     date_obs       
                object                      object        
    ------------------------------ -----------------------
                    WAVE,SPECTEMPL 2008-01-03T08:57:45.000
                            OTHER 2008-01-03T08:58:07.803
                    WAVE,SPECTEMPL 2008-01-03T08:59:37.000
                    WAVE,SPECTEMPL 2008-01-03T09:00:38.000
                            ...                     ...
        PHOTOMETRY,OBJECT,SCIPHOT 2008-01-12T02:23:16.606

.. tip::

    Use :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.query_main` when you want to search **across all instruments**. Use :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.query_instrument` when you want a more **refined, instrument-specific search** (e.g. instrument modes, configurations, or ambient conditions).

    .. doctest-remote-data::

        >>> column_filters = {
        ...     "dp_cat": "SCIENCE",           # Science data only
        ...     "ins_opt1_name": "HIGH_SENS",  # High sensitivity mode
        ...     "night_flag": "night",         # Nighttime observations only
        ...     "moon_illu": "< 0",            # No moon (below horizon)
        ...     "lst": "between 0 and 6"       # Local sidereal time early in the night
        ... }
        >>> table = eso.query_instrument("midi", column_filters=column_filters)


Download Data
=============

To download the data returned by the query, you can use the :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.retrieve_data` method. This method takes a list of data product IDs (``dp_id``) and downloads the corresponding files from the ESO archive.

.. doctest-remote-data::
    >>> eso.retrieve_data(table["dp_id"]) # doctest: +SKIP

The ``data_files`` list points to the decompressed dataset filenames that have been locally downloaded. The default location of the decompressed datasets can be adjusted by providing a ``destination`` keyword in the call to :meth:`~astroquery.eso.EsoClass.retrieve_data`.

.. doctest-remote-data::
    >>> data_files = eso.retrieve_data(table["dp_id"], destination="./eso_data/") # doctest: +SKIP

For raw data, you can also retrieve associated calibration files by
passing ``with_calib="raw"`` (or ``with_calib="processed"``). See
:doc:`eso_obs_download` for examples and the related CalSelector terminology.